<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 MD041 -->

<div id="doc-begin" align="center">
  <h1 id="header">
    <pre>Hjem [ˈjɛmˀ]</pre>
  </h1>
  <p>
    A streamlined way to manage your <code>$HOME</code> with Nix.
  </p>
  <br/>
  <a href="#what-is-this">Synopsis</a><br/>
  <a href="#features">Features</a> | <a href="#module-interface">Interface</a><br/>
  <a href="#things-to-do">Future Plans</a>
  <br/>
</div>

## What is this?

[systemd-tmpfiles]: https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/latest/systemd-tmpfiles-setup.service.html
[smfh]: https://github.com/feel-co/smfh

**Hjem** ("home" in Danish) is a module system that implements a simple and
streamlined way to manage files in your `$HOME`, such as but not limited to
files in your `~/.config`. Hjem aims to approach as an alternative,
easy-to-grasp utility for managing your `$HOME` purely and safely.

### Features

We have learned from the mistakes made in the ecosystem.

1. Powerful `$HOME` management functionality and potential
2. Small and simple codebase with minimal abstraction
3. Robust, safe and _manifest based_ file handling with [smfh]
4. Multi-user by design, works with any number of users
5. Designed for ease of extensibility and integration

No compromises, only comfort.

### How to use

Refer to our documentation at https://hjem.feel-co.org/.

### Implementation

Hjem exposes a streamlined interface with multi-tenant capabilities, which you
may use to manage individual users' homes by leveraging the module system.

```nix
{ inputs, lib, pkgs, ... }:
{
  /*
    other NixOS configuration here...
  */

  hjem = {
    users = {
      alice = {
        enable = true;

        files = {
          # Write a text file in `/home/alice/.foo`
          # with the contents bar
          ".foo".text = "bar";

          # Alternatively, create the file source using a writer.
          # This can be used to generate config files with various
          # formats expected by different programs.
          ".bar".source = pkgs.writeText "file-foo" "file contents";

          # You can also use generators to transform Nix values
          ".baz" = {
            # Works with `pkgs.formats` too!
            generator = lib.generators.toJSON { };
            value = {
              some = "contents";
            };
          };
        };

        # this will write into `/home/alice/.config/test/bar.json`
        xdg.config.files."test/bar.json" = {
          generator = lib.generators.toJSON { };
          value = {
            foo = 1;
            bar = "Hello world!";
            baz = false;
          };
          # overwrite existing unmanaged file, if present
          clobber = true;
        };
      };
    };
  };
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> Each attribute under `hjem.users`, e.g., `hjem.users.alice` or
> `hjem.users.jane` represent a user managed via `users.users` in NixOS. If a
> user does not exist, then Hjem will refuse to manage their `$HOME` by
> filtering non-existent users in file creation.

## Module Interface

[already does!]: https://github.com/snugnug/hjem-rum

The interface for the `hjem` module is conceptually very similar to prior art
(e.g., Home Manager), but it does not act as a collection of modules like Home
Manager. Instead, we implement minimal features, and leave
application-specific abstractions to the user to do as they see fit.
This, of course, does not mean that a module collection cannot exist.
In fact, one [already does!]

Below is a live implementation of the module.

```sh
$ nix eval .#nixosConfigurations.test.config.hjem.users.alice.files.'".foo"' --json | jq
{
  "clobber": false,
  "enable": true,
  "executable": false,
  "generator": null,
  "relativeTo": "/home/alice",
  "source": "/nix/store/22yfhzhk0w5mgaq6c943vimsg6qlr1sh-foo",
  "target": "/home/alice/.foo",
  "text": "bar",
  "value": null
}
```

### Linker Implementation

Hjem relies on our home-baked tool [smfh], an atomic and reliable file creation
tool designed by [Gerg-l]. We utilize smfh and Systemd services [^1] to
correctly link files into place.

[^1]: Which is preferable to hacky activation scripts that may or may not break.
    Systemd services allow for ordered dependency management across all
    services, and easy monitoring of Hjem-related services from the central
    `systemctl` interface.

### Environment Management

Hjem does **not** manage user environments as one might expect, but it provides
a convenient `environment.sessionVariables` option that you can use to store
your variables. This script will be used to store your environment variables in
a POSIX-compliant script generated by Hjem, which you can source in your shell
configurations.

## Usage without flakes

We support usage without flakes.
Specifically, you can use the following shell commands:

| With flakes | Without flakes |
| --- | --- |
| `nix flake check` | `nix-build -A checks` |
| `nix develop` | `nix-shell -A shell` |
| `nix build .#smfh` | `nix-build -A packages.smfh` |
| `nix fmt` | `nix run -f . formatter` |

You can also `import` the root of the repo and get all of the same attributes as the flake (without `system`).

## Things to do

Hjem is _mostly_ feature-complete, in the sense that it is a clean
implementation of `home.files` in Home Manager: it was never a goal to dive into
abstracting files into modules.

### Alternative or/and configurable file linking mechanisms

[Gerg-l]: https://github.com/gerg-l

Hjem previously utilized [systemd-tmpfiles] to ensure files are linked in place.
This served us well for the short duration that we relied on them, but we
have ultimately decided to go with our in-house file linker developed by
[Gerg-l]. The new linker is, of course, infinitely more powerful and while we
are _not_ looking back, we understand that some users might be interested in
alternative linking mechanisms that they can customize as they prefer.

You can set [`hjem.linker`](https://hjem.feel-co.org/options.html#option-hjem-linker)
to use a custom linker if desired.

## Attributions / Prior Art

[Nixpkgs]: https://github.com/nixOS/nixpkgs
[Home Manager]: https://github.com/nix-community/home-manager
[Hjem Rum]: https://github.com/snugnug/hjem-rum
[@Lunarnovaa]: https://github.com/lunarnovaa
[@nezia1]: https://github.com/nezia1

Special thanks to [Nixpkgs] and [Home Manager]. The interface of the
`hjem.users` module is inspired by Home Manager's `home.file` and Nixpkgs'
`users.users` modules. What is now Hjem started as an experimental module
addition to Nixpkgs' `users.users`. Hjem would not be possible without any of
those projects, thank you!

A project worthy of note is [Hjem Rum], by [@Lunarnovaa] and [@nezia1], which
establishes a Home Manager-like module system for users less comfortable with
manually linking files in place. If you wish to utilize the power of Hjem, but
want an easier interface, we encourage you to take a look at Hjem Rum.

Last but not least, our sincerest thanks to everyone who has used, contributed
to or just talked about Hjem in public spaces. Thank you for the support!

## License

This project is made available under Mozilla Public License (MPL) version 2.0.
See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for more details on the exact conditions. An online copy
is provided [here](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/MPL/2.0/).

<div align="right">
  <a href="#doc-begin">Back to the Top</a>
  <br/>
</div>
